## Help groups that do not belong to a specific documentation file.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@$JCL
<TITLE JEDI Code Library>
<TOPICORDER 1>
The JEDI Code Library (JCL) consists of a set of utility functions and
non-visual classes which can be instantly reused in your Delphi and C++ Builder
projects.

The library is built upon code donated from the JEDI community. It is
reformatted to achieve a common look-and-feel, tested, documented and merged
into the library. The library is grouped into several categories (see below).
The library is released to the public under the terms of the Mozilla Public
License (MPL) and as such can be freely used in both freeware/shareware,
opensource and commercial projects.

The entire JEDI Code Library is distributed under the terms of the Mozilla
Public License (MPL). This includes, but is not limited to, this document and
all source code and ancillary files. Source code files included in the JCL have
a header which explicitly states this (as is required) however, unless noted
otherwise, all files including those without an MPL header, are subject to the
MPL license.

For more information visit our <EXTLINK http://homepages.borland.com/jedi/jcl/>
homepage</EXTLINK>.

Note: This documentation has been created using Doc-O-Matic Professional 3.10.
Many thanks to <EXTLINK http://www.toolsfactory.com/>toolsfactory</EXTLINK> for
generously granting free licenses to the JEDI team!
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@$LibrariesProcessesandThreads
<GROUP $JCL>
<TITLE Libraries\, Processes and Threads>
<TOPICORDER 1300>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@$EDI
<GROUP $JCL>
<TITLE Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)>
<TOPICORDER 600>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@$ExprEval
<GROUP $JCL>
<TITLE Expression Evaluation>
<TOPICORDER 700>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@$Windows
<GROUP $JCL>
<TITLE Windows>
<TOPICORDER 2800>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclCounter.pas

This unit contains a high performance counter class which can be used for highly
accurate timing
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclDateTime.pas

Routines for working with dates and times. Mostly conversion between the
different formats but also some date testing routines (is leap year? etc)

Contributors:
Anthony Steele, Charlie Calvert, Heri Bender, Marc Convents, Marcel van Brakel,
Matthias Thoma, Michael Schnell, Nick Hodges,
  Anonymous,
  Petr Vones,
  Robert Marquardt,
  Robert Rossmair
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclDebug.pas

Various debugging support routines and classes. This includes: Diagnostics
routines, Trace routines, Stack tracing and Source Locations a la the C/C++
__FILE__ and __LINE__ macros.

Contributor(s):
  Marcel van Brakel, Flier Lu,
  Robert Marquardt,
  Robert Rossmair,
  Petr Vones
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclFileUtils.pas

This unit contains routines and classes for working with
files, directories and path strings. Additionally it contains
wrapper classes for file mapping objects and version
resources.

Generically speaking, everything that has to do with files
and directories. Note that filesystem specific functionality
has been extracted into external units, for example JclNTFS
which contains NTFS specific utility routines, and that the
JclShell unit contains some file related routines as well but
they are specific to the Windows shell.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclGraphics.pas
The resampling algorithms and methods used in this library
were adapted by Anders Melander from the article "General
Filtered Image Rescaling" by Dale Schumacher which appeared
in the book Graphics Gems III, published by Academic Press,
Inc. Additional improvements were done by David Ullrich,
Josha Beukema and Mike Lischke.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclMidi.pas
<GROUP $MultiMedia.MIDI>

Unit <B>JclMIDI</B> supplies platform-independent <LINK $MultiMedia.MIDI, MIDI>
declarations.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclNTFS.pas

Contains routines to perform filesystem related tasks available only with NTFS.
These are mostly relatively straightforward wrappers for various IOCTs related
to compression, sparse files, reparse points, volume mount points and so forth.

Note that some functions require NTFS 5 or higher!
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclRegistry.pas
Summary
Unit <B>JclRegistry </B>contains useful routines for registry
manipulation in addition to standard routines provided by
several Delphi classes.
Description:
  Contains various utility routines to read and write registry values. Using these routines
  prevents you from having to instantiate temporary TRegistry objects and since the routines
  directly call the registry API they do not suffer from the resource overhead as TRegistry does.
Donators: John C Molyneux, Marcel van Brakel, Charlie Calvert
Contributors:
  Marcel van Brakel, Stephane Fillon, Eric S.Fisher, Peter Friese,
  Anonymous, Andreas Hausladen, Manlio Laschena,
  Robert Marquardt, Robert Rossmair, Olivier Sannier, Petr Vones
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclStrings.pas
The module <B>JclStrings</B> contains routines for strings
manipulation, conversion and transformation.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@@JclSvcCtrl.pas
<GROUP $Windows.ServiceControl>
This unit contains routines and classes to control Windows NT services
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

